.TH PMM 9 "June 2025" "Unics Kernel Developer Manual" "Physical Memory Manager"
.SH NAME
pmm \- physical memory management subsystem of Unics kernel
.SH SYNOPSIS
The PMM subsystem provides allocation, reservation, and tracking of physical memory pages.  
It supports multiple memory regions and zones, each managed via bitmaps.
.SH DESCRIPTION
The physical memory manager (PMM) is responsible for managing the physical RAM available to the kernel.  
Memory is divided into regions, each described by a \fCpmm_region_t\fP structure containing:

.IP
- Base physical address
.IP
- Number of pages
.IP
- Bitmap indicating allocated/free pages
.IP
- Zone type (DMA, NORMAL, HIGHMEM)
.IP
- Allocation hints for efficiency

.PP
Memory is managed at page granularity (\fCPMM_PAGE_SIZE\fP).  
Allocation uses bitmap scanning to find free pages or contiguous blocks.  
Regions are maintained in a linked list \fCpmm_regions\fP.

.SH FUNCTIONS
.TP
.B pmm_init(void)
Initializes the PMM subsystem. Must be called once at kernel startup.

.TP
.B pmm_add_region(uintptr_t base, size_t size, pmm_zone_t zone)
Adds a physical memory region to be managed by the PMM.

.TP
.B pmm_reserve_range(uintptr_t start, uintptr_t end)
Marks a range of physical addresses as reserved/unavailable.

.TP
.B pmm_alloc_page(void)
Allocates a single free physical page from the NORMAL zone.

.TP
.B pmm_alloc_page_zone(pmm_zone_t zone)
Allocates a single free page from the specified zone.

.TP
.B pmm_alloc_pages(size_t count)
Allocates multiple contiguous pages from the NORMAL zone.

.TP
.B pmm_alloc_pages_zone(size_t count, pmm_zone_t zone)
Allocates multiple contiguous pages from the specified zone.

.TP
.B pmm_free_page(void *addr)
Frees a previously allocated page.

.TP
.B pmm_free_pages(void *addr, size_t count)
Frees multiple contiguous pages.

.TP
.B pmm_is_page_allocated(void *addr)
Checks if a given page address is allocated.

.TP
.B pmm_get_stats(void)
Returns memory usage statistics.

.TP
.B pmm_dump_state(void)
Prints detailed memory regions and allocation status.

.TP
.B pmm_dump_stats(void)
Prints a summary of physical memory usage.

.SH IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
The PMM uses 64-bit bitmaps to track page allocation status efficiently.  
Fast bit scanning is implemented via software CLZ (count-leading-zeros) to find free pages.  
Allocation tries to find free pages starting from the last allocation hint to reduce fragmentation.

Pages are aligned to \fCPMM_PAGE_SIZE\fP boundaries.  
The system supports multiple zones for specialized memory usage, aiding device DMA and high-memory management.

.SH ERROR HANDLING
Functions return \fC0\fP on success and \fC-1\fP on failure.  
Errors include uninitialized PMM, invalid addresses, double-free detection, and out-of-memory conditions.

.SH AUTHOR
0x16000

.SH SEE ALSO
vm(9), cpu(9), malloc(9)

