.\" Manpage for VGA driver - section 9 (Kernel Developer Manual)
.TH VGA 9 "June 2025" "Unics Kernel Developer Manual" "VGA Text Mode Driver"
.SH NAME
vga \- text mode VGA driver for console output and cursor control
.SH SYNOPSIS
The VGA driver provides basic text-mode output on VGA-compatible hardware.  
It manages character display, cursor position, colors, and screen scrolling.

.SH DESCRIPTION
The VGA driver writes characters directly to the VGA text buffer at physical address 0xB8000.  
It supports:
.IP
- Character and string output with control characters (newline, tab, backspace)
.IP
- Hardware cursor control and positioning
.IP
- Foreground/background color and text attribute management
.IP
- Screen clearing, scrolling, and area manipulation
.IP
- Optional double-buffering to reduce flicker
.IP
- Drawing boxes and filling screen areas with characters
.SH FUNCTIONS
.TP
.B vga_initialize(void)
Initializes VGA text mode, clears the screen, and enables the hardware cursor.

.TP
.B vga_shutdown(void)
Disables the cursor and deactivates the driver.

.TP
.B vga_clear(void)
Clears the entire screen using the current color attribute.

.TP
.B vga_putchar(char c)
Outputs a single character, handling special control characters properly.

.TP
.B vga_puts(const char *str)
Outputs a null-terminated string to the screen.

.TP
.B vga_printf(const char *format, ...)
Minimal printf-like function supporting %d, %x, %s, %c, and %% specifiers.

.TP
.B vga_set_color(vga_color_t fg, vga_color_t bg)
Sets the text foreground and background colors for subsequent output.

.TP
.B vga_update_cursor(int x, int y)
Moves the hardware cursor to the specified screen coordinates.

.TP
.B vga_enable_cursor(void)
Enables the visible hardware text cursor.

.TP
.B vga_disable_cursor(void)
Disables the hardware text cursor.

.TP
.B vga_scroll_up(int lines)
Scrolls the screen content up by the specified number of lines.

.TP
.B vga_scroll_down(int lines)
Scrolls the screen content down by the specified number of lines.

.TP
.B vga_draw_box(int x, int y, int width, int height, uint8_t color)
Draws a simple ASCII box at the specified position and color.

.SH IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
The VGA text buffer is a linear array of 16-bit entries, each encoding a character and color attribute.  
Cursor position is managed by writing to VGA controller ports 0x3D4/0x3D5.  
Scrolling is performed by moving blocks of memory within the buffer.  
Double buffering uses a separate memory area to reduce flickering during updates.

.SH ERROR HANDLING
Most functions safely ignore calls if the VGA driver is not initialized or if parameters are out of valid bounds.  
Invalid input characters are ignored or replaced by spaces.

.SH AUTHOR
0x16000

.SH SEE ALSO
io(9), printf(3), outb(2)

